# Lokono

## Introduction

The Lokono, also known as Arawak, are an indigenous people of the Guianas,
whose territory stretches along the coast of the Atlantic Ocean, from
northwestern Guyana, through Suriname, to northwestern French Guiana.

## Description

### Lokono (or Arawak)

![](lokono_map_1.webp)

The _Lokono_, also known as _Arawak_, are an indigenous people of the Guianas,
whose territory stretches along the coast of the Atlantic Ocean, from
northwestern Guyana, through Suriname, to northwestern French Guiana (see
map) [#1]. The Lokono speak a language that belongs to the Arawakan language
family, one of the largest linguistic groupings on the continent. Like many of
their linguistic relatives, the Lokono are agriculturalists specializing in the
farming of manioc (_Manihot esculenta_), who also practice fishing, hunting,
and gathering of wild plant. However, as one of the first indigenous groups
that was encountered by the Europeans at the time of conquest, the Lokono have
been in contact with non-indigenous populations for over 500 years [#2]. This
contact has intensified in the last century, leading to a substantial loss of
the Lokono language, traditional material and immaterial culture, changes in
subsistence practices, and in particular to the disappearance of _medicine-men_,
the traditional carriers of spiritual knowledge, most likely including
ethnoastronomical knowledge.

As a consequence, the modern knowledge about celestial bodies appears to be but
a fraction of what the Lokono knew about stars in the past. Several
constellations mentioned in older sources are forgotten or are only known from
their names, while the combinations of stars they represent and the oral
traditions explaining their origin and significance have been forgotten. The
sky culture presented here includes only identified constellations but the
following description provides a more comprehensive account of Lokono
astronomical knowledge including information extracted from historical sources
about all the celestial objects named in the table below.

### Lokono constellations and other celestial objects

| Lokono name  | Literal translation in English | Approximate location |
|--------------|--------------------------------|----------------------|
| _Hadali_ |  | Sun |
| _Kathi_ |  | Moon |
| _Warhokoma_ |  | Venus |
| _Waya nukuthi bunaha_ | Path of the carriers of clay | Milky Way |
| _Mali_ |  | Sirius |
| _Yôkoro wiwa_ | Scores of stars | Pleiades |
| _Wiwa kalemero_ | Shining star | Jupiter |
| _Yorhada_ | Grill | Pegasus |
| _Kamodokoya_ | Spirit of the green anaconda | unclear |
| _Kibiwarhakoya_ | Spirit of the capibara | unknown |
| _Mabukuli_ | Man without a thigh | Orion's belt |
| _Kama tâla_ | Jaw of the tapir | Hyades |
| _Hithikoya_ | Spirit of the black curassow | Crux |
| _Yokhârhin_ | Hunter | α Centauri |
| _Alêti_ | Torch | β Centauri  |
| _Anorhâkoya_ | Spirit of the cocoi heron | Ursa Major |
| _Honolikoya_ | Spirit of the rufescent tiger heron | unknown |
| _Kasorhowakoya_ | Spirit of the four-eyed fish | λ Sco and υ Sco |
| _Katarokoya_ | Spirit of the green sea turtle | Hercules |
| _Hikorhikoya_ | Spirit of the yellow-footed tortoise | unknown |
| _Kwakoya_ | Spirit of the blue crab | Orion |
| _Ifakoya_ | Spirit of the Muscovy duck | Corona Australis |
| _Awarhakoya_ | Spirit of the awara palm | Coma Berenices |
| _Hadorhikoya_ | Spirit of the red acouchi  | unknown |
| _Hokorherokoya_ | Spirit of the red-rumped agouti | unknown |
| _Kabadarokoya_ | Spirit of the jaguar | unknown |
| _Korhirhwathekoya_ | Spirit of the ocelot | unknown |
| _Hawkoya_ | Spirit of the pale-throated sloth | unknown |
| _Warhemedokoya_ | Spirit of the two-toed sloth | unknown |
| _Yôwanakoya_ | Spirit of the green iguana | unknown |
| _Yarheyarherokoya_ | Spirit of the lilac-tailed parrot | unknown |
| _Marodikoya_ | Spirit of the marail guan | unknown |
| _Hikarowanakoya_ | Spirit of the little cuckoo | unknown |
| _Sûtukoya_ | Spirit of the red-handed tamarin | unknown |
| _Howakoya_ | Spirit of the white-faced saki | unknown |
| _Imenarikoya_ | Spirit of the scorpion | unknown |
| _Korherokoya_ | Spirit of the parrot | unknown |
| _Kasipenikoya_ | Spirit of a tortoise | unknown |
| _Shimarhabokoya_ | Spirit of the bow and arrow | unknown |
| _Arakabosakoya_ | Spirit of the gun | unknown |
| _Maraka_ | Medicine-men’s rattle | unknown |


### Lokono astronomical knowledge: an introduction

From contemporary and historical accounts, it appears that astronomical
knowledge was not restricted to particular members of the Lokono society.
However, it was the medicine-men in particular — the spiritual leaders of the
Lokono known as _semethi_ — who were required to master the various aspects of
star knowledge and who might have been responsible for passing the oral
traditions associated with them from one generation to another. From Rodrigo de
Navarette, who around 1550 wrote one of the first accounts of the Lokono, we
learn, for instance, that: “old and wise men whom they call _Cemetu_ assemble
in the houses designed for their meetings and (...) recount the traditions and
exploits of their ancestors and great men, and also narrate what those
ancestors heard from their forefathers; so that in this manner they remember
the most ancient events of their country and people. And, in like manner they
recount or preach about events relating to the heavens, the sun, moon, and
stars.”[#3]

Navarette's _cemetu_, the medicine-men known in modern Lokono as _semethi_,
have largely given up their practices today, which may be the reason why the
transmission of astronomical knowledge has been interrupted. Many Lokono
constellations appear to have been forgotten today. Our sources are therefore
often limited to historical accounts written by early explorers and
ethnographers of the Guianas, one of the oldest examples of which is
illustrated below.

![](schulz.webp)
Fig.1 List of Lokono stars by Theodor Schulz, circa 1803 [#23].
{: .img_and_caption }

It is this literature that allows us to party reconstruct the Lokono stellar
knowledge, described below. Before discussing the individual celestial bodies,
however, several general features of Lokono astronomy merit a mention, namely:

*   the overlap with the astronomical traditions of neighboring indigenous groups.
*   the oral traditions explaining the origin and significance of celestial bodies.
*   the use of the term _koya_ ‘spirit’ in the names of numerous constellations.
*   the use of the general term _wiwa_ ‘star, year’ and the lack of other astronomical terms.
*   the sky watching practices of the Lokono.

### 1. Shared Guianan knowledge

The Lokono territory borders that of two linguistically unrelated indigenous
peoples, the Kari’na, speaking a Cariban language, and the Warao, speaking a
language isolate. Though unrelated and traditionally not intermarrying, the
three groups share a great deal of material and immaterial culture.
Ethnoastronomical tradition of the three peoples also shows a number of
striking similarities, such as shared stellar myths, similar names of
constellations, and parallels in the stellar calendar. This speaks to the
contacts between the three groups and to the exchange of astronomical
knowledge, possibly facilitated by their respective spiritual leaders, such as
the Lokono _semethi_. The degree to which these traditions overlap and the
directionality of their exchange require further study. Here, we focus on the
Lokono and therefore do not discuss these cultural borrowings in detail, unless
they shed light on the Lokono ethnoastronomy.

### 2. Stellar oral traditions

One of such shared features are myths about stars. Such oral traditions tell of
the origins of particular celestial bodies, link them to one another, and
explain their influence on the natural world. The Lokono constellation
_Hithikoya_ ‘Spirit of the black curassow’, for instance, is linked in a Lokono
myth to that of _Yokhârhin_ ‘Hunter’ and _Alêti_ ‘Torch’, all three of which
have Kari’na and Warao equivalents. It is these oral traditions, preserved by
the medicine-men, that likely served as the main vehicle through which
astronomical knowledge was passed from one generation to another. For this
reason, summaries of the relevant myths are given in the description of
particular constellations. Occasionally, when the relevant Lokono myth is not
documented, myths of the neighboring groups are referred to in order to
illuminate the significance of particular celestial bodies. Given that many of
such oral traditions are shared by the Lokono and the neighboring groups, this
enhancement of the poorly preserved Lokono astronomical knowledge is justified.

### 3. Calendar of spirits

The term _koya_ ‘spirit’, found in numerous constellation names typically
following a term for a particular plant or animal, is a key feature of Lokono
astronomy. Walter Roth, an ethnographer of the Guianas, explains that such
constellations are the spirits of the corresponding beings.[#4] At a time of
the year when the constellation appears, the spirit travels from the sky to
earth to breath life into the beings it represents. As such, the
_koya_-constellations formed a calendar, indicating what the best time is to
engage in subsistence activities related to these plants and animals (e.g.
hunting or gathering). The Lokono may have also known where such spirits would
descend on earth; Walter Roth suggests that they called these places with the
same names as the constellations but the evidence of that remains poor. Thus,
_Hadorhikoya_ ‘Spirit of the red acouchi’ would refer to the spirit, the
constellation, and the place where the _hadorhi_ is found in plenty when its
constellation appears. While this toponymic knowledge is forgotten today, the
_koya_-constellations remind us of the great understanding of the plant and
animal life that the Lokono possessed.

### 4. _Wiwa_, the star and the year

The Lokono also have another general term that is used to refer to stars,
_wiwa_. The term lacks the spiritual connotations of _koya._ It refers, on the
one hand, to the physical quality of stars as something shining and, on the
other hand, to the calendar year. As such, it is used, for instance, when
talking about one’s age. While it can apply to any star, _wiwa_ appears only in
two proper names of celestial bodies. _Yôkoro wiwa_, literally ‘Scores of
stars’ (Pleiades), is the most important of all Lokono constellations, whose
appearance traditionally commences the Lokono calendar year. Following _Yôkoro
wiwa_ are the numerous _koya_-constellations, each signaling a different season
in the Lokono calendar. On the other hand, _Wiwa kalemero_, literally ‘Shining
star’ (Jupiter) appears to have been singled out solely due to its brightness.
Apart from _wiwa_ and _koya_, there are no generic terms distinguishing
planets, stars, moons, suns, galaxies and so on in the Lokono language. For
this reason, the Lokono equivalent of the Milky Way, for instance, is included
among other constellations.

### 5. Sky watching practices

While the Lokono can admire the sky in the evening, to follow the Lokono
stellar calendar, one has to look at the constellations around 4 am in the
morning, the time when the Lokono usually wake up. The Lokono thus observe the
rising of the constellations in the morning. To get the right idea of the
yearly cycle of constellations, one should also set the viewing location to the
Guianas (e.g. Georgetown, Paramaribo, or Cayenne in the location menu). It
merits a mention that many Lokono, when drawing constellations, did not connect
the stars with lines and that in some cases, there was little agreement among
speakers as to which star within a constellation corresponds to which parts of
the plant or animal it represents. In Stellarium, we represent constellations
with lines, but it should be kept in mind that this may be a distortion of the
Lokono tradition, which allows for more flexibility in interpreting particular
star groups. Finally, there are restrictions on looking at some celestial
bodies, since it is believed that a spirt can harm one if looked at [#5]. For
instance, by full moon, mothers covered the eyes of their children so that they
would not become sick [#6]. Young people were also told not to look at _Yôkoro
wiwa_ (Pleiades), or else they would not grow [#7]. Such practices applied also
to other objects believed to harbor powerful spirits and included other ways of
avoiding eye-contact with spirits such rubbing peppers, limes, or salt into
one’s eyes.

### Lokono celestial bodies

_Hadali_ 'Sun'

The Lokono term for the Sun is _Hadali_, also pronounced as _Adali_. Claaudius
de Goeje suggests that the variously spelled names of the Lokono culture hero,
the first medicine-man known as _Harlitvanli_, _Haliwalika_, _Halwanli_,
_Hariwalli_, and _Arawanili_, and sometimes _Arawidi_, may all refer to the
same hero identified as the Sun [#8]. While we cannot confirm this hypothesis,
the myth of _Arawidi_ is worth mentioning. In the Lokono myth, _Arawidi_, the
Sun, is the father of a man that becomes the constellation _Mabukuli_ ‘Man
without a thigh’ (Orion’s belt) [#9][#10][#11]. According to the story, the
Sun used to come to earth in the shape of a man called _Arawidi_ to meet his
lover with whom he had twins. In a later episode of the myth, one of the twins
marries a woman, whose mother the couple decide to kill. When they try to
escape, the wife’s sister chases them and manages to cut off his leg in
revenge. As a result, the man ascends to the sky and becomes the constellation
_Mabukuli_. Another Lokono myth warns against offending the Sun: a man, stuck
on an uninhabited island in the middle of a swamp, cries out for help. A boat
passes him, but inside the boat is the Sun, which does not want to help the
man, since people always complain that the Sun shines too hard [#11]. As far as
practices related to the Sun, Im Thurn reported that among the Lokono, the
eclipse of the Sun was considered a war between _Hadali_ and _Kathi_, the Moon,
and that the Lokono would shout and make all kinds of noises to stop them from
fighting [#12].

_Kathi_ 'Moon'

The moon is known as _Kathi_, a term first recorded by Joannes de Laet as
_cattehee_ around 1598, and used also to refer to the lunar month [#13].
According to the Lokono, the Moon, like the Sun, was once a man. Walter Roth
reports a Lokono myth, in which a young woman was visited by a mysterious lover
night after night [#10]. To find out who the lover was, the woman smeared her
hands with the soot from the bottom of a pot. Next day, when she woke up, she
found that her brother’s face was covered in soot and realized it was him who
visited her at night. Everybody in her community started to avoid the
incestuous brother, who became so ashamed that he kept away from the people and
ultimately ascended to the sky, becoming the Moon. This is why, according to
the Lokono, the face of the moon is dirty today. The Moon appears also in
another myth. In the Lokono myth about a man stuck on an uninhabited island
mentioned above, another boat passes the man, but this time inside is the Moon,
which decides to help the man, since people are always happy to see the Moon
come out at night [#11]. The Moon and Sun are also depicted as opponents. In
previous times, the Lokono believed that the eclipse of the Moon is its death
(_kathi ôdon_ ‘moon dying’) and would keep watch all night.[#6] The Lokono say
during the eclipse of the Moon that the Moon has fallen asleep on the Sun’s
path [#11]. Therefore, they make a lot of noise, play drums, and blow shell
trumpets to wake him up. By full moon, mothers would cover the eyes of their
children so that they do not become sick.

_Warhokoma_ 'Venus'

The planet Venus, both when it appears in the morning as the Morning Star and
when it appears in the evening as the Evening Star, is called _Warhokoma_ by
the Lokono [#8][#14][#15]. Charles Dance, on the other hand, reports the terms
_Eweiwah_ and _Huewah_, probably the equivalents of the general term _wiwa_
‘star’ which can be used for any shining celestial body [#16]. The Lokono also
speak of Venus as _Hiyaro wiwa_ ‘women’s star’. In relation to this, it merits
a mention that Claudius de Goeje reports that when _Hiyaro wiwa_ appears close
to the Moon, and a girl is about to have her first menstruation, the Lokono say
that the girl will soon be touched by the Moon [#5]. There is no myth about
_Warhokoma_ specifically and its relation to the Moon, but it is worth
reminding that the Lokono know a story, in which the Moon was originally a man
who committed incest with his sister (see the myth mentioned under _Kathi_),
and has a name as a womanizer [#10]. Interestingly, the name _Warhokoma_ for
Morning or Evening Star appears also in Kari’na, who see it also as the Moon's
wife [#17][#18].

_Waya nukuthi bunaha_ 'Milky Way'

The Milky Way is known among the Lokono as _Waya nukuthi bunaha_, literally
‘Path of the carriers of clay’. The Milky Way represents the footprints of men
who once went to fetch clay for making pots, an art that is, rarely if at all,
practiced by the Lokono today. The origin of the name, however, is still known,
and is summarized in a myth [#19]. The same name for Milky Way was noted by
William Brett who adds that it is named after a specific whitish type of
clay [#14]. Charles Dance, on the other hand, says that the Milky Way represents
the footprints of peccaries rooting up the clay, while Walter Roth mentions a
different Lokono explanation, according to which the Milky way represents a
tapir chased by a dog and jaguar [#10][#16]. However, these two sources do not
give the corresponding Lokono name for the Milky Way, and it is possible that
these two explanations are a Kari’na influence, who recognize a constellation
of a tiger following the constellation of a tapir within that of the Milky
Way [#17].

_Mali_ 'Sirius'

The modern Lokono call Sirius _Mali_, the literal meaning of which is unknown.
Cornelius van Coll describes a Lokono star called _Mali_ and explains that it
is a very powerful star [#7][#17]. When it comes up in the morning in August,
it kills the fish in the swamps, and one should not point at it or one’s finger
will become lame. Cornelius van Coll’s _Mali_ marks the beginning of the big
dry season (August to December), called in Lokono _malidalithe_, a term derived
from _Mali_. Older sources identified _Mali_ tentatively as Lyra, Aquila, or
Crux, but given that the big dry season starts around August and that the
Lokono observe the stars in the morning, these identifications must be
incorrect; Lyra, Aquila, and Crux cannot be seen at this time from the Lokono
territories [#11][#17]. There are no Lokono myths about _Mali_, but there is
evidence that is may correspond to the Kari’na constellation _Ombatapo_
‘Previous face’. The Kari’na myths explain the origin of the constellation and
its name, which, like the Lokono _Mali_, is believed to kill the fish in the
swamps and announces the beginning of the big dry season. Moreover, the Kari’na
_Ombatapo_ is identified as parts of Puppis and Canis Major, the latter of
which includes Sirius [#18][#20].

## Constellations

##### Yôkoro wiwa

The constellation _Yôkoro wiwa_ or _Wiwa yôkoro_, literally ‘Score of stars’,
refers to the Pleiades and is easily recognized by the contemporary Lokono.
This is likely because _Yôkoro wiwa_ is described as the most important of
Lokono constellations, since it announce the beginning of the Lokono year [#17].
After it comes out first in June in the east, it is followed by the numerous
_koya_-constellations referring to the spirits of animals and plants that
constitute the Lokono calendar. At that time of the year, the Lokono say
_Yôkoro wiwa kayaran_ ‘the birth of _Yôkoro wiwa_’. It is said that if _Yôkoro
wiwa_ shines strong when it appears for the first time, many people will die in
the coming year [#5]. Cornelius van Coll also warns that young people should not
look at it, or else they will not grow [#7]. These omens and warnings are
related to a Lokono myth. According to the story, there were once twin
brothers, one of which had a wife, and said that death would come when their
star, _Yôkoro Wiwa_, rises [#7]. Death came indeed, killing even his wife,
roasting her on the fire, and the Lokono became angry and brought a giant green
anaconda to swallow the twins. The snake ate one of the brothers, but because
it was already 5 am and the day broke, the snake could not eat the other
brother. The snake is now the constellation _Kamodokoya_ ‘Spirit of the green
anaconda’, in the belly of which _Yôkoro Wiwa_ is said to be located (see also
the _Yorhada_ myth). In another narrative, the Lokono explain that the _Yôkoro
Wiwa_ represents seven brothers lost in a savannah on their way back home, a
motif also known from a Kari'na story [#20].

##### Yorhada

The constellation _Yorhada_ ‘Grill’, or _Wiwa yorhadale_ ‘Star’s grill’,
represents a wooden grill, on which meat is roasted [#4][#11][#21]. Its origin
is explained in a myth related by Walter Roth about a man who killed his wife,
roasted her, and fed her liver to his mother-in-law because she called him a
worthless hunter [#10]. In revenge, the mother asked her brother, _Kamodo_ to
kill the man when he went hunting. The man suspected the woman set a trap and
escaped death by sending his brother instead. The grill on which the wife was
roasted became the Western constellation Pegasus, according to contemporary
Lokono, marking the beginning of the small dry season (April), the time when
the Lokono roast a lot of fish. The myth is similar to that of _Yôkoro wiwa_
and the twins, in which the older brother is responsible for roasting his wife
and may be the same as the man who roasted his wife in the _Yorhada_ myth. In
both myths, the younger brother killed by the anaconda becomes _Yôkoro wiwa_,
while the grill becomes _Yorhada_. Claudius de Goeje suggested that _Yorhada_
is the Western constellation Corvus, but Corvus does not appear at beginning of
the small dry season [#11]. The neighboring Warao also know Pegasus as the
grill, and are familiar with the myth [#10].

##### Kamodokoya

_The constellation Kamodokoya_, ‘Spirit of the green anaconda (_Eunectes
murinus_)', also called _Waroboshi_ remains poorly described.[#5] Older sources
suggest it is Perseus, Pleiades, Scorpio, or Ophiuchus, but the exact stars
remain unidentified.[#10],[#11],[#21] Several myths explain its origin.
According to Walter Roth, a man killed his wife, roasted her, and fed her liver
to her mother because she called him a worthless hunter.[#10] In revenge, she
asked _Kamodo_ to kill him, but the man escaped the snake who ate his younger
brother instead. The constellation _Kamodokoya_ has _Yôkoro wiwa_, the brother,
inside, and is close to _Yorhada_ ‘Grill’, on which the wife was roasted.
Notably, Theodor Schultz list the constellation _Waroboshi yorhadale_ 'The
grill of the green anaconda' which could be the same as the constellation
_Yorhada_.[#23] Cornelius van Coll speaks of twins, one of whom had a wife, and
warned that their star brings death.[#7] Indeed, even his wife died, roasted on
the fire. The Lokono had the snake kill the man, and ascend to the sky as
_Kamodokoya_. Finally, Claudius de Goeje relates a myth of a woman who felt a
desire for men, and put a _katuburi_ flower in her vagina, and became pregnant.
Her child was partly a snake, and people wanted to kill it, so it ascended to
the sky.

##### Kibiwarhakoya

The constellation _Kibiwarhakoya_ ‘Spirit of the capybara’ (_Hydrochoerus
hydrochaeris_) was mentioned by the Penard brothers.[#17] The same source also
informs us that it is followed by the constellation _Kamodokoya_ ‘Spirit of the
green anaconda’. The constellation remains unidentified and its significance is
unknown. No related myths have been documented.

##### Mabukuli

The constellation _Mabukuli_ ‘Man without a thigh’ is well known among the
Lokono and appears in a few myths. According to Charles Dance, an unsuccessful
huntsman cut off his own leg, wrapped it up in a leaf, and gave to his step
mother so that she had something to eat, and ascended to sky.[#16] Similarly,
the Penard brothers speak of an unsuccessful hunter who cut off his leg and
gave it to his wife and mother-in-law, telling them it was tapir meat.[#17] He
then asked other people to follow his traces to help him bring the rest of the
tapir, but when they arrived at the place they only found the _akalali_ plant
with which he treated his wounds. His body turned into the _Kama tâla_
constellation and his spirit into _Mabukuli_. Claudius de Goeje relates a
strikingly different myth.[#11] The Sun, once a man called _Arawidi_ (see the
myth about _Hadali_ 'Sun'), took a woman as his wife, who followed him with
unborn twins inside her. One day, she lost the way and ended up being eaten by
vulture spirits, but her twins were brought up by an old woman, whom they later
killed and ran away. While hiding in a treetop, they saw a woman catching fish
with a sifter. She saw their reflection in the water and tried to catch it, at
which they laughed. She then realized they were up in the tree, and sent ants
up the tree to make them come down. When they came down, she killed one of them
and took the other home. One of her daughters fell in love with the man and
married him. Now the husband had to catch a lot of fish every day for the
mother-in-law. One day, tired of his demanding mother-in-law, he tricked her
into getting into the water to help him unload a boat full of fish, where she
was eaten by a shark. When her other daughter arrived, the liver of her mother
was still floating on the water and told her that the man killed her. The
daughter wanted to kill him but he flew away on wings of cotton that his wife
made for him, so she only cut his thigh off, which is why he is now the
constellation _Mabukuli_. It appears the Orion's belt represents the cut-off
leg, not the man himself.

##### Kama tâla

The constellation _Kama tâla_ ‘Jaw of the tapir’ is one of the few
constellations identified easily by the contemporary Lokono, just like
_Mabukuli_, to which it is related in a myth.[#8],[#15] The Penard brothers
recount the story of an unsuccessful hunter, who cuts meat off his leg and
gives it to his wife and mother-in-law, telling them it is tapir meat (_Tapirus
terrestris_).[#17] He then asks his fellow people to follow him and help bring
the rest of the tapir, but when they arrive at the place they only find the
_akalali_ plant with which he treated his wounds. His body turned into _Kama
tâla_ and his spirit into _Mabukuli_. In a Kari’na story, on the other hand,
_Kama tâla_ was the remains of a tapir that the mythical twins were hunting,
one of whom accidentally gets his leg severed and becomes the constellation of
man without a thigh.

##### Hithikoya

The constellation _Hithikoya_ is the ‘Spirit of the black curassow’ (_Crax
alector_), a commonly hunted bird, often kept as a pet for its feathers and
eggs. According to a Lokono myth, _Hithikoya_ lived on earth, but the Lokono
kept shooting him.[#11] As a result, he ascended to the sky to warn black
curassows about the approaching hunter (see _Yokhârhin_) and his companion with
a torch (see _Alêti_). The Lokono identify _Hithikoya_ as the Western
constellation Crux. When it appears just above the trees in January, the
curassows roam on the ground and are easy to catch. Over the following months,
the higher _Hithikoya_ rises in the morning, the higher the birds climb up the
trees. By March, it appears high in the sky and the birds are found in the tops
of the trees. _Hithikoya_ thus informs the Lokono where to search for the birds
at a given time of the year. The Lokono even make hunting charms (_bina_) from
a plant, whose leaves resemble the bird, rubbed into the lips of the hunter so
that he can imitate the calls of the bird, increasing his chances of catching
one [#10][#17].

##### Yokhârhin

The constellation _Yokhârhin_ ‘Hunter’ corresponds to α Centauri and represents
the man hunting _Hithikoya_, the ‘Spirit of the black curassow’ (see
_Hithikoya_).[#9],[#10],[#11] His companion holding a torch known as _Alêti_ is
represented by β Centauri. The myth reported by the Penard brothers that
explains the origin of _Hithikoya_ includes also these two characters.[#11]
According to the story, _Hithikoya_ used to live on earth, but the Lokono kept
tracking him down at night and shoot him. As a result, it ascended to the sky
to serve as a signal for black curassows warning them about the approaching
hunter (_Yokhârhin_) and his companion with a torch (_Alêti_). As _Hithikoya_
appears higher and higher in the morning between January and March, _Yokhârhin_
and subsequently _Alêti_ appear on the horizon following it. This indicates to
the Lokono that the black curassow can now be found high in the tress and the
hunters can set out at night to hunt it in the tree tops.

##### Alêti

The constellation _Alêti_ ‘Torch’ corresponds to&nbsp;β Centauri and represents
the companion of the hunter _Yokhârhin_, holding a torch torch made from a
piece of cloth dipped in beeswax known as _Alêti_.[#9],[#10],[#11] _Alêti_
follows _Yokhârhin_ so as not to scare the black curassow bird with the light
of the torch. The myth reported by the Penard brothers that explains the origin
of _Hithikoya_ 'Spirit of the black curassow' includes also these two
characters (see _Hithikoya_).[#11] According to the story, _Hithikoya_ used to
live on earth, but the Lokono kept tracking him down at night and shoot him. As
a result, it ascended to the sky to serve as a signal for black curassows
warning them about the approaching hunter (_Yokhârhin_) and his companion with
a torch (_Alêti_). As _Hithikoya_ appears higher and higher in the morning
between January and March, _Yokhârhin_ and subsequently _Alêti_ appear on the
horizon following it. This indicates to the Lokono that the black curassow can
now be found high in the tress and the hunters can set out at night to hunt it
in the tree tops.

##### Anorhâkoya

The constellation _Anorhâkoya_ represents the spirit of the cocoi heron (_Ardea
cocoi_). It is recognized by contemporary Lokono as Ursa Major, in keeping with
earlier identifications.[#11],[#15] Claudius de Geoje reports that when it
shines strong, the Lokono believe that strong winds will come, bringing dust
into peoples’ eyes and consequently diseases: the heron picks their eyes with
its beak, it is said.[#11] Similarly, according to Cornelius van Coll,
_Anorhâkoya_ is a heron whose beak is upside down. Should its beak be turned
downwards, people would get all kinds of eye diseases.[#7] This can still
happen when strong winds blow and carry the light from the beak into peoples’
eyes, since the light of _Anorhâkoya_ (and other stars) travels with the wind
according to the Lokono. The constellation is associated with the big dry
season (August to December) and the storms and winds that are typical of this
time. It appears in the morning in mid-November in the northeast with its beak
down.

##### Honolikoya

Another Lokono constellation named after a species of a heron is _Honolikoya_
‘_Spirit of the rufescent tiger heron_’ (_Tigrisoma lineatum_). It is reported
in historical sources as the equivalent of the Kari’na constellation _Kumawari
yumï_ (‘Father of the cocoi heron’). This is likely a mistake as _honoli_ is a
different and well-known species of a heron. It is possible that _Honolikoya_
refers to the same constellation as _Anorhâkoya_, interpreted differently by
different Lokono consultants, but it is also possible it is a different
constellation. In any case, _Honolikoya_ remains unidentified.[#17] Just like
_Anorhâkoya_, the constellation is said to bring diseases of the eyes when it
appears in the morning sky. From the Penard brothers' description we can infer
that _Honolikoya_ should appear between June and the big dry season, which
lasts from end of August until the beginning of December. There appears to be
no specific myth associated with this constellation.[#17]

##### Kasorhowakoya

The constellation _Kasorhowakoya_ ‘Spirit of the four-eyed fish’ (_Anableps
anableps_) was identified by the contemporary Lokono as λ Scorpii and υ
Scorpii. In earlier sources it is identified as the upper part of Scorpio’s
tail, which is in keeping with the 21st century data.[#8] The constellation
represents the two eyes of the four-eyed fish, which is known for the fact that
its eyes are always sticking above the water, and is therefore sometimes
considered an incarnation of the water spirit. There is no Lokono myth
concerning the four-eyed fish, and it remains unknown what the appearance of
this constellation signifies. However, it merits a mention that the Kari’na
have a constellation representing the same fish, which corresponds to the same
two stars. Magaña and Jara explain that the appearance of the Kari’na
constellation announces the fishing season for this species.[#18] It is not
unlikely that the Lokono constellation had the same function.

##### Katarhokoya

The constellation _Katarhokoya_ ‘Spirit of the green sea turtle’ is still known
on the Pomeroon River in Guyana. It represents the _katarho_ turtle (_Chelonia
mydas_), swimming towards the shore, represented in turn by the Milky Way. When
the constellation appears in the morning high in the sky, it is a signal that
turtles are arriving on the beaches to lay eggs. The constellation was
identified in earlier sources as _Corona Borealis_ and _Orion's belt._
[#8],[#11] While the former overlaps with the stars indicated by the Lokono on
the Pomeroon, the latter is likely a mistake as _Orion’s belt_ is consistently
recognized as _Mabukuli_ ‘Man without a thigh’. The constellation _Katarhokoya_
rises early in the year, but it appears upside down most of the time from the
vistas of the Lokono in the Guianas. Only by mid-March, a time when several
species of turtles indeed lay their eggs on the Atlantic coast of the Guianas,
does it look like a turtle swimming to the shore (Milky Way).

##### Hikorhikoya

The constellation _Hikorhikoya_ ‘Spirit of the yellow-footed tortoise’ was
documented by the Penard brothers for the Lokono in Suriname; it remains
unidentified but it should appear around August (i.e. around the beginning of
the big dry season).[#11],[#17] The Penard brothers explain that when the water
in the swamps rises, the yellow-footed tortoise, known in Lokono as _hikorhi_
(_Chelonoidis denticulatus_), seeks higher grounds, and, presumably, can be
more easily found. There are no myths related to the constellation
specifically. However, it is worth pointing out that the tortoise is considered
a delicacy among the Lokono. When caught, they are often kept around the house
in small corrals for long periods of time until they are consumed. The Lokono
joke that they are ‘fridges’ since if fed, the tortoise will stay alive for a
long time, as opposed to an animal that was shot and has to be prepared and
eaten immediately.

##### Kwakoya

The constellation _Kwakoya_ ‘Spirit of the blue crab’ is still known in the
Lokono communities closer to the coast, which practice the annual crab feats.
The crab species is likely the same as that represented by the Kari’na
constellation _Kusa yumï_ ‘Father of the blue crab’ (_Ucides cordatus_). The
constellation appears in the east in the middle of July. By the beginning of
August, it is high in the sky, signaling that the crabs arrive at the beaches
to lay their eggs. At this time, the Lokono and other indigenous groups of the
area congregate to the shore of the Atlantic to catch the marching crabs. The
crabs are considered a delicacy and when the villagers return to the
communities with the catch, large feasts are organized during which the crabs
are eaten. The Penard brothers write that _Kwakoya_ appears when the crabs come
to lay their eggs in May and June but this appears to be incorrect, both given
that crabs march later and that the constellation recognized by the modern
Lokono is not visible in May and June from the Guianas.[#17]

##### Ifakoya

The constellation _Ifakoya_ ‘Spirit of the Muscovy duck’ (_Cairina moschata_)
was mentioned by the Penard brothers and Claudius de Goeje but remained
unidentified until now.[#11],[#17] The contemporary Lokono on the Pomeroon
River in Guyana recognize it in parts of the Western constellation Corona
Australis. There are no myths related to this constellation but the Lokono say
that when the head of the duck points toward the ground, looking as if the duck
has its head under the water, the ducks are busy feeding on plants. The
constellation assumes this position from mid-May. At this time, it is said that
the birds are easier to catch. The Muscovy duck is considered a delicacy and is
also often kept around the house like chickens. The Kari'na and the Warao also
recognize the constellation of the Muscovy duck, and at least the Warao one
corresponds to the same stars.[#17]

##### Awarhakoya

The constellation _Awarhakoya_ ‘Spirit of the awara palm’ has the shape of an
awara palm (_Astrocaryum vulgare_). Its appearance high in the sky in January
means that awara fruits are ripening. In the following months, _Awarhakoya_
moves closer to the horizon, meaning that the fruits will soon fall to the
ground to be picked. This occurs in the small dry season (mid-February to
April), known as _awarhadlithe_, a term derived from the name of the
palm.[#7],[#17] There are no myths about _Awarhakoya _but it is said that the
constellation is followed by that of the _Hadorhikoya_ ‘Spirit of the red
acouchi’ and _Hokorherokoya_ ‘Spirit of the red-rumped agouti’. Their
appearance signals that the rodents are gathering by the palms to eat the
fallen fruit. _Awarhakoya_ is recognized today in stars close to the Western
constellation Coma Berenices, but older sources suggest it is near Sirius.[#11]
It is the only constellation named after a plant, which speaks to the
importance of the awara palm to the Lokono. The Kari'na also have a
constellation of the awara, sometimes recognized in the same stars [#17],[#20].

##### Hadorhikoya

The unidentified constellation _Hadorhikoya_ ‘Spirit of the red acouchi’
(_Myoprocta acouchy_) was mentioned by the Penard brothers.[#17] It should
follow the constellation _Awarhakoya_ appearing near it sometime after
February. Its appearance signals that the ripe fruits of the palm attract the
red acouchi to the awara grooves, where they can be hunted. There is no Lokono
myth about _Hadorhikoya_, but a Kari’na myth about the unidentified Kari’na
constellation of the red acouchi relates it to the several other
constellations. According to the story, there were two brothers, of which one
had a wife. The unmarried brother killed his brother, fed his liver to the
wife, took her as his wife, and had a child with her. The spirit of the dead
brother told the woman that his brother killed him, so she and her child
decided to run away and ascend to the sky as the constellation of the agouti
and acouchi. The spirit also told his brother to cut open his corpse and
scatter his insides, which became the Pleiades, while the killer became the
constellation of the anaconda.[#11]

##### Hakorherokoya

The unidentified constellation _Hokorherokoya_ ‘Spirit of the red-rumped
agouti’ was mentioned by the Penard brothers, who explain that like
_Hadorhikoya_, it follows _Awarhakoya_.[#17] It signals that the ripe fruit
attracts the agouti (_Dasyprocta leporina_) to the awara palms, where they can
be hunted. Claudius de Goeje adds that it is followed by _Kabadarokoya_ ‘Spirit
of the tiger’, which, like humans, knows agouti's habits.[#11] There is no
Lokono myth about _Hokorherokoya_, but a Kari’na myth about the unidentified
constellation of the agouti explains its origin. According to the story, there
were two brothers, one married, the other not. The unmarried one killed the
other, fed his liver to the wife, took her as his wife, and had a child with
her. The dead brother's spirit told her that his brother killed him, so she and
her child ran away, becoming the agouti and acouchi constellations. The spirit
then told his brother to open his corpse and scatter his insides, which became
the Pleiades, while the killer became the anaconda constellation.[#11]

##### Kabadarokoy

_Kabadarokoya_ or _Arhwakoya_ ‘Spirit of the jaguar’ was mentioned by the
Penard brothers, who link it to a Lokono myth.[#7],[#11] According to the
story, _Kabadaro_ (_Panthera onca_) was the father of _Korhirhwathe_
(_Leopardus species_), whom he loved so much, he did not want to marry her
out.[#33] One day a thorn got stuck in his paw and a man helped him take it
out, so he gave the man his daughter as his wife. The family always had meat,
so other people were jealous and told the man that his wife cheated on him. He
started mistreating her. When the jaguar learned about this, he ran away with
his daughter but the man followed them everywhere, so finally they ascended to
the sky. But when the Lokono kill a jaguar, they can come back to earth to kill
people. According to Claudius de Goeje, it follows the agouti star, a delicacy
of the jaguars.[#11] The constellation is unidentified. The Kari’na
constellation of the jaguar is said to appear around the small dry season, when
jaguars roar more because they suffer from insects.[#17],[#20]

##### Korhirhwathekoya

The constellation _Korhirhwathe_ ‘Spirit of the ocelot’ was mentioned by the
Penard brothers, who link it to the same Lokono myth summarized above for
_Kabadarokoya_.[#11] According to the story, _Kabadaro_ (_Panthera onca_) was
the father of _Korhirhwathe_ (_Leopardus species_), whom he loved so much, he
did not want to marry her out. However, one day a thorn got stuck in his paw
and a man helped him take it out, so he gave the man his daughter as his wife.
The family always had plenty of meat, so other people became jealous and told
the man that his wife cheated on him. As a result, he started mistreating
_Korhirhwathe_. When the jaguar learned about this, he took his daughter, and
ran away with her into the forest, but the man followed them everywhere, so
finally they ascended to the sky becoming constellations. Now, when the Lokono
kill a jaguar, they can come back to earth to kill people.

##### Hawkoya

The constellation _Hawkoya_ ‘Spirit of the pale-throated sloth’ was mentioned
by Claudius de Goeje.[#11] It represents a species of a sloth (_Bradypus
tridactylus_) and is an omen of storms and windy weather that occur at the
beginning of the big dry season (between August and December). At this time,
the sloths start to wander about more, and the Lokono say that it is because of
the winds.[#17] The constellation remains unidentified.

##### Warhemedokoya

Similarly, _Warhemedokoya_ ‘Spirit of the two-toed sloth’, mentioned by the
Penard brothers, is said to appear when the storms and winds of the big dry
season are about to start and make the sloths move about more.[#17] It
represents the two-toed sloth (_Choloepus didactylus_). The constellation
remains unidentified.

##### Yôwanakoya

The constellation _Yôwanakoya_ ‘Spirit of the green iguana’ is mentioned by the
Penard brothers.[#17] It represents the green iguana (_Iguana iguana_) and
appears when the iguanas lay their eggs in the sand, which should be sometime
in April and May, but the constellation remains unidentified.

##### Yarheyarherokoya

The constellation _Yarheyarherokoya_ ‘Spirit of the lilac-tailed parrot’
(_Touit batavicus_) was mentioned by Claudius de Goeje.[#11] The constellation
is not known to contemporary Lokono; neither do we know what its appearance
used to signify.

##### Marodirokoya

The constellation _Marodikoya_ ‘Spirit of the marail guan’ was mentioned by
Claudius de Goeje, who comments that it has the shape of the marail guan
(_Penelope marail_).[#11] The constellation is not known to contemporary
Lokono; neither do we know what its appearance used to signify.

##### Hikarowanakoya

The constellation _Hikarowanakoya_ ‘Spirit of the little cuckoo’ was only
mentioned by Claudius de Goeje.[#11] It represents the little cuckoo (_Coccycua
minuta_). The constellation remains unidentified; neither do we know what its
appearance used to signify. However, the Penard brothers mention the Kari’na
constellation of a cuckoo species identified as the very similar _Piaya
cayana_.[#17],[#22] The Kari'na constellation is said to bring luck to hunters.
Interestingly, the Lokono link hunter’s luck to the little cuckoo as well. They
say that if the bird passes you calling _pikwan pikwan pikwan_, you have to
watch out, as something bad might happen to you.

##### Sûtukoya

The constellation _Sûtukoya_ ‘Spirit of the red-handed tamarin’ (_Saguinus
midas_) was mentioned by Cornelius van Coll and the Penard brothers but it
remains poorly identified.[#7],[#11],[#43] According to Claudius de Goeje, it
should correspond to the Western constellation Coma Berenices.[#17] It is not
clear whether this is correct, however, given that today we find the
constellation _Awarhakoya_ in this part of the sky, which is easily recognized
by numerous speakers. There are no myths related to this constellation.

##### Howakoya

The constellation _Howakoya_ 'Spirit of the white-faced saki’ was only
mentioned by de Claudius de Goeje.[#17] It represents the spirit of white-faced
saki (_Pithecia pithecia_) but the constellation and its significance remain
unknown.[#44]

##### Imenarikoya

The constellation _Imenarikoya_ ‘Spirit of the scorpion’ was only mentioned by
Claudius de Goeje.[#11] The constellation refers to a spirit of an unidentified
species of a large poisonous scorpion. There are no known myths about
_Imenarikoya_. The constellation could be a case of cultural borrowing from
non-indigenous populations, as has been suggested for the Kari'na constellation
representing a scorpion.

##### Maraka

The constellation _Maraka_ 'Rattle of the medicine-man' was mentioned by
Claudius de Goeje, and refers to a rattle used by the Lokono medicine-men,
which is made of a calabash pierced with a stick, adorned with feathers of a
certain parrot, and filled with numerous small crystals, each of which harbors
a different spirit, that is a different type of _koya_.[#11] The constellation
remains unidentified; there is no Karin'a or Warao equivalent and there are no
myths related to it.

##### Shimarhabokoya and Arakabosakoya

The constellation _Shimarhabokoya_ ‘Spirit of the bow and arrow’ and
_Arakabosakoya_ ‘Spirit of the gun’ were mentioned by Claudius de Goeje.[#11]
Both constellations remain unidentified and do not have Kari’na and Warao
counterparts, and there are no myths related to them.

##### Korherokoya

The constellation _Korherokoya_ ‘Spirit of the parrot’ was only mentioned by
Claudius de Goeje.[#11] The constellation refers to a spirit of an unidentified
species of a parrot, but it was mentioned as the equivalent of the Kari’na
constellation _Kurewako yumï_ ‘Father of the orange-winged parrot’,
representing the orange-winged parrot (_Amazona amazonica_). There are no known
myths about _Korherokoya_. It should appear in February when the parrots are
big enough to be taken out of their nests, but the constellation remains
unidentified.

##### Kasipenikoya

The constellation _Kasipenikoya_ ‘Spirit of the sea turtle’ was mentioned by
Claudius de Goeje.[#11] It refers to the spirit of an unidentified species of a
turtle. It may be the case that it is the same as _Katarokoya_. The term
_kataro_ (_Chelonia mydas_) appears to be a term borrowed from Kari’na, it is
thus possible that _kasipeni_ is the original Lokono term for the same turtle.
However, there are several species of turtles in the Guianas, thus _kataro_ and
_kasipeni_ can also refer to different species, and their spirits be identified
with different constellations.

## References

 - [#1]: Rybka, Konrad. 2015. [State-of-the-Art in the Development of the Lokono Language.](https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/handle/10125/24635) Language Documentation and Conservation 9: 110–13.
 - [#2]: Rybka, Konrad. 2017. [Contact-Induced Phenomena in Lokono (Arawakan).](https://www.degruyter.com/view/books/9781614514886/9781614514886-010/9781614514886-010.xml) In Boundaries and Bridges, edited by Kofi Yakpo and Pieter C. Muysken. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, pp 257-281.
 - [#3]: Navarette, Rodrigo Pérez de. 1964. “Relación de Las Provicias y Naciones Que Los Indios Llamados Aruacas [Tienen] [...].” In Relaciones Geográficas de Venezuela, edited by Antonio Arellano Moreno, 83–87. Caracas: Academia Nacional de la Historia.
 - [#4]: Roth, Walter Edmund. 1924. An Introductory Study of the Arts, Crafts, and Customs of the Guiana Indians. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
 - [#5]: Goeje, Claudius Henricus de. 1943. Philosophy, Initiation and Myths of the Indians of Guiana and Adjacent Countries. Archives Internationales d’ethnographie. 44.
 - [#6]: Abbenhuis, M.F. 1939. Arawakken in Suriname: Enquête-Materiaal Voor Een Volkenkundige Studie. Paramaribo: Leo Victor.
 - [#7]: Coll, Cornelius van. 1903. “Gegevens over Land En Volk van Suriname I - Suriname’s Oorspronkelijke Bevolking.” Bijdragen Tot de Taal-, Land- En Volkenkunde / Journal of the Humanities and Social Sciences of Southeast Asia 55 (1): 453–529.
 - [#8]: Goeje, Claudius Henricus de. 1928. The Arawak Language of Guiana. Amsterdam: Uitgave van der Koninklijke Akademie von Wetenschappen te Amsterdam.
 - [#9]: Brett, William Henry. 1880. Legends and Myths of the Aboriginal Indians of British Guiana. London: Williams Wells Gardner.
 - [#10]: Roth, Walter Edmund. 1915. An Inquiry into the Animism and Folk-Lore of the Guiana Indians. Annual Report, Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology 30. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.
 - [#11]: Goeje, Claudius Henricus de. 1942. “De Inwijding Tot Medicijnman Bij de Arawakken (Guyana) in Tekst En Mythe.” Bijdragen Tot de Taal-, Land- En Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië 101: 211–76.
 - [#12]: Im Thurn, Everard Ferdinand. 1883. Among the Indians of Guiana: Being Sketches Chiefly Anthropologic from the Interior of British Guiana. London: K. Paul, Trench &amp; Company.
 - [#13]: Laet, Joannes de. 1633. Novus Orbis, Seu Descriptionis Indiae Occidentalis Libri XVIII. Leiden: Apud Elzevirios.
 - [#14]: Brett, William Henry. 1868. The Indian Tribes of Guiana: Their Condition and Habits. London: Bell and Daldy.
 - [#15]: Baarle, Peter van, Mauricius Alberto Sabajo, van der Stap Gerdy, Sabajo Andreas L., and Sabajo Lucia L. 1989. Arhwaka lokonong djang: Arowakse taalkursus en woordenboek. Haarlem; Amsterdam: Sociaal-culturele Vereniging Ikyoshie ; Instituut voor Algemene Taalwetenschap, Universiteit van Amsterdam.
 - [#16]: Dance, Charles D. 1881. Chapters from a Guianese Log Book. Georgetown, Guyana.
 - [#17]: Penard, Frederik Paul, and Arthur Philip Penard. 1907. De Menschetende Aanbidders Der Zonneslang. Paramaribo: H.B. Heyde.
 - [#18]: Magaña, Edmundo, and Fabiola Jara. 1982. “The Carib sky.” Journal de la Société des Américanistes 68 (1): 105–32.
 - [#19]: Bennett, John P. 1995. Twenty-Eight Lessons in Loko (Arawak): A Teaching Guide. Georgetown, Guyana: Walter Roth Museum of Anthropology.
 - [#20]: Ahlbrinck, Willem. 1931. Encyclopaedie Der Karaïben. Amsterdam: Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen.
 - [#21]: Schumann, Christian Ludwig. 1882. “Arawakish-Deutsches Wörterbuch.” In Grammaires Et Vocabulaires Roucouyenne, Arrouague, Piapoco Et D’autres Langues De La Région Des Guyanes, Par J. Crevaux, P . Sagot, L. Adam..., edited by Jules Nicolas Crevaux, Paul Antoine Sagot, and Lucien Adam, 7–165. Paris: Maisonneuve.
 - [#22]: Courtz, H. 2008. A Carib Grammar and Dictionary. Toronto, ON, Canada: Magoria Books.
 - [#23]: Arawak manuscripts, American Philosophical Society, manuscript number: [Mss.498.3.Sch8](https://search.amphilsoc.org/collections/view?docId=ead/Mss.498.3.Sch8-ead.xml), Page 562 in the original manuscript, which corresponds to page 576 in the digitalized document. The image was reduced in size, cropped, and reproduced here with the kind permission of the American Philosophical Society.

## Authors

This sky culture was contributed by [Konrad Rybka](konrad.rybka@gmail.com) and
produced with the help of Lokono speakers in Suriname (Cassipora) and
Guyana (Wakapoa). The research was carried out as part of the project supported
by a Rubicon postdoctoral grant from the Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (project number 446-15-012).

Quote as: Rybka, Konrad 2018. _Lokono sky culture: a description of Lokono
ethnoastronomical knowledge for Stellarium software_. Version 1.0

Technical clean-up: Susanne M Hoffmann, 2020

## License

CC BY-NC
