# Hawaiian

## Introduction

These are the star lines developed by Nainoa Thompson and used by the
Polynesian Voyaging Society to navigate Polynesian sailing canoes using
traditional techniques of non instrument navigation across thousands of miles
of open ocean.

## Description

For years, Hawaiian navigators have memorized the position of stars as they
rise and set in order to know oneʻs bearing. Wayfinder Nainoa Thompson (born
1953, Hawaii) is a graduated navigator and famous for being the first Hawaiian
to practice Polynesian art of navigation since the 14th century with a
double-hulled canoe. He developed a system of organization to help memorize the
position of stars throughout the celestial sphere by dividing the sky into four
evenly sized star lines. This system roots in ancient Hawaiian constellations
which he had got to know during his studies.

### History

The knowledge of Hawaiian star navigation has been passed down orally for many
generations. Much of the knowledge regarding stars and navigation were lost
until the Hawaiian Renaissance in the early 1970s. Polynesian Voyage Society
(PVS), founded in 1973, created Hokule’a in 1975. Hokule’a is a traditional
Hawaiian voyaging canoe with the mission to revive the art of way finding. A
man from Satawal, Micronesia named Mau Piailug was a master
navigator/wayfinder. The knowledge of wayfinding and using the sky to navigate
was passed down to Mau from his ancestors. Nainoa Thompson, current President
of PVS, asked Mau to teach his knowledge of navigation to him with the
intention of reviving the knowledge that was once lost to the Hawaiians. With
the knowledge learned from Mau, the Hawaiian star compass and star lines were
created.

### Star Lines

Each star line is a group of main stars that will be remembered by the
navigators. The stars connect making constellations. Navigators remember the
rising/setting houses of these stars, the stars that connect in each line, and
the lines that point directly to North and South. The star lines’ position in
the night sky slowly change over time, each starline being more prevalent at
night according to the season. The star lines with their according season are
as follows:

| Native Name        | Season               |
|--------------------|----------------------|
| _Ke Ka o Makali‘i_ | November to April    |
| _Ka Iwikuamo‘o_    | April to July        |
| _Manaiakalani_     | May to October       |
| _Ka Lupe o Kawelo_ | September to February|

### Background and Acknowledgements

The _master navigator_ behind this sky culture was Mau Piailug of Satawal, who
taught the Polynesian art of celestial navigation to Nainoa Thompson, who
developed this version of the sky culture that was used from 2013-17 by
Hawaiians to sail around the world during the Malama Honua Voyage of Hokule’a,
the Polynesian voyaging canoe. Stellarium has been used as a tool by the
navigators of Hokule’a and this sky culture serves as a tool for practicing
Polynesian navigation.

## Constellations

##### Ke Ka o Makali’i

The direct translation means the “Canoe Bailer of Makali’i”. The lines are
shaped as a canoe bailer which scoops _Ka Hei-Hei o Na Keiki_ (Orion) and
_Makali’i_ (Pleiades) up into the night sky. In voyaging a bailer is used to
scoop up water out of the hulls.

The main stars of _Ke Ka o Makali’i_ from North to South are _Hokulei_
(Capella), _Nanamua_ (Castor), _Nanahope_ (Pollux), _Puana_ (Procyon), and
_‘A’a_ (Sirius). These stars connect together to create the bailer in the sky.
Mintaka in Orion is an important star in this line because it rises/sets
directly east or west giving the navigator an easy pointer star for direction.
Mirzim (next to _‘A’a_ (Sirius)) and _Ke Ali’i Kona i Ka Lewa_ (Canopus)
connect together to create a southern pointer. _‘Ekekeuehuehu_ (θ Aur, Mahasim)
and _‘Ekekeu’ena’ena_ (β Aur, Menkalinan) connect to create a northern pointer.
Different north/south pointers are found in the star lines and used heavily by
navigators.

##### Ka Iwikuamo’o

_Ka Iwikuamo’o_ translates to the backbone (directly: Bone back-lizard). This
star line is depicted as the backbone of a lizard or _mo’o_ in this sky
culture. It can also be representing a genealogical backbone, each star
representing a generation.

The star line itself starts with _Hokupa’a_ (North Star), the ultimate northern
pointer due to the star never moving in the sky, always above north. _Hokupa’a_
connects down to _Na Hiku_ (Big Dipper). _Na Hiku_ translates to “The Seven” as
there is seven stars in the Big Dipper. _Hokule’a_ (Arcturus) and _Hikianalia_
(Spica) are the two stars in the middle of the star line. The two PVS canoes
are named after these two stars. _Hokule’a_ is the “zenith” star of Hawai’i,
meaning it will be directly overhead when you are at the latitude of the
Hawaiian Islands. _Hokule’a_ is very important to navigators on finding their
way back to Hawai’i. The meaning of _Hokule’a_ is “the star of gladness”
because it is the star used to find home bringing joy. Next to _Hikianalia_ is
_Me’e_, a combination of four stars that create a box. _Me’e_ connects down to
_Hanaiakamalama_ (Southern Cross) which is the southern pointer for _Ka
Iwikuamo’o_.

##### Manaiakalani

_Manaiakalani_ translates to “The Chief's Fishline”. This refers to the legend
of the demi god Maui and his fish hook. Maui is credited for pulling up the
islands with his magical fish hook.

This star line consists of two constellations. The Navigator’s Triangle on the
north and Maui’s fish hook on the south. The Navigator’s Triangle is made of
three stars _Hawaiki_ (Deneb), _Keoe_ (Vega), and _Humu_ (Altair). (It is the
same figure as the Summer Triangle for modern amateur astronomers.) These stars
also represent the Polynesian triangle: Hawai’i (_Hawaiki_), Rapanui (_Keoe_),
and Aotearoa (_Humu_). These three islands are pulled by the fish hook of Maui
(Scorpius).

The northern pointer is found in the Navigator’s Triangle when you connect
_Hawaiki_ (Deneb) and _Momonapikowalu_ (γ Cyg, Sadr). Southern pointers are in
the fish hook when you connect _Mili’opu_ (δ Sco, Dschubba) and _Kahe_ (π Sco,
Nur), the stars on the top of the hook.

##### Ka Lupe o Kawelo

_Ka Lupe o Kawelo_ translates to “The Kite of Kawelo”. Kawelo was a great chief
of Kaua’i and O’ahu and this star line represents the kite which was lost as a
child.

The star line starts with _‘Iwakeli’i_, meaning Chief Frigate Bird (_Fregata
Minor_). The shape of this constellation (which is Cassiopeia's W in the West)
resembles the _‘iwa_ bird that is known for leading voyagers to land. The
center of the star line is the Kite of Kawelo (equal to the Great Square of
Pegasus). The four stars that make the kite are named after Kawelo’s greatest
ancestors: _Manokalanipo_ (δ Peg, Alpheratz), _Kakuhihewa_ (β Peg, Scheat),
_Pi’ilani_ (γ Peg, Algenib), and _Keawe_ (α Peg, Markab). All four were famous
chiefs of their time. The star line then connects south to two stars _Pi’ikea_
(β Cet, Deneb Kaitos) and _Kukaniloko_ (α PsA, Fomalhaut).

The northern pointer is found in _Manokalanipo_ (δ Peg, Alpheratz) and
_Kealohalani-po-keao_ (β Cas, Caph) of _‘Iwakeli’i_. The southern pointer is
connected with _Keawe_ (α Peg, Markab) and _Kukaniloko_ (α PsA, Fomalhaut).

## References

 - [#1]: [Polynesian Voyaging Society](http://hokulea.com)
 - [#2]: [Hawaiian Voyaging Society](http://pvs.kcc.hawaii.edu/ike/hookele/hawaiian_star_lines.html)
 - [#3]: [Imiloa](http://www.imiloahawaii.org/71/star-paths)
 - [#4]: [Hawaiian Star Lines and Names for Stars](http://archive.hokulea.com/ike/hookele/hawaiian_star_lines.html)

## Authors

This sky culture was contributed in 2017 by teachers Darren Kamalu and
Christopher Blake, Students Jonah Apo, Nicholas Koanui, Brenden Aila and the
Celestial Navigation class at Kamehameha Schools Kapalama, Honolulu, Hawai’i.

Artwork by Kealoha Kaneakua.

Reworked by Susanne M Hoffmann.

## License

CC BY-SA
